# Design

This database will make use of conservative 2-phase locking which allows for strict serializability and no deadlocks, but comes at the cost of transaction throughput and requires better upfront planning around data layout and queries. However, due to the use of COW BTrees, users can opt into snapshot isolation for non-blocking read transactions when needed. Users will be encouraged to use optimistic concurrency control for implementing transactions that require reading data before it can be determined where to perform writes, as may be the case with highly referential data.

## File Format

Like LMDB the file will begin with a single meta blocks that contains assorted static information like magic number, database verison, and block size. The roots of each BTree will contain a pointer to root, generation, and checksum ([crc32c](https://github.com/zowens/crc32c)). Any modification will swap writing between the two. On startup, the one with higher generation and valid checksum will be chosen as canonical. This strategy combined with COW operations removes the need for a WAL.

A block size must be specified up front when creating the database or will be detected automatically using `statx.stx_atomic_write_unit_max`. After the meta block, the rest of the file is a series of chunks, where a chunk begins with a free block bit mask, meaning an entire block such that each 0/1 represents whether a subsequent block is free or allocated, and said series of blocks. For a block size of 4kb, which is a common standard, that translates to a chunk size of ~128mb. This scheme allows for a fairly fast scan of the database file on startup for initalization of in-memory block allocator state. The main tradeoff is that database modifications must pre-commit their block allocations to each chunk header, so in the case of a dirty shutdown it's possible to "leak" blocks. That being said, headers can be cleaned up later by a routine that traverses the BTree structure.
